Document locks and change visibility in datashard YDBDOCS-430 YDBDOCS-431 (#912)
ydb-platform/ydb: ydb/docs/en/core/development/datashard-locks-and-change-visibility.md

Note that `LockTxId` is just a unique number, that is used across multiple operations in the same YQL transaction, while `TxId` is unique for every operation for a single DataShard. The use of the first `TxId` as `LockTxId` is not required, but since KQP already has a globally unique number, and `LockTxId` is unrelated to `TxId`, it elides an extra allocation.

Locks table (see [datashard_locks.h](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/blob/main/ydb/core/tx/datashard/datashard_locks.h) and [datashard_locks.cpp](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/blob/main/ydb/core/tx/datashard/datashard_locks.cpp)) indexes locks by their primary key ranges in a range tree, allowing finding and "breaking" them by point keys. In the simplest case when read operation reads a range it is added using a [SetLock](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/blob/207ac81618e05ade724a8a8193bc9125d466bd06/ydb/core/tx/datashard/datashard_locks.h#L831) method, and when write operation writes a key it breaks other locks using a [BreakLocks](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/blob/207ac81618e05ade724a8a8193bc9125d466bd06/ydb/core/tx/datashard/datashard_locks.h#L834) method.

> When the lock is added for the first time, it is assigned a monotonically increasing `Counter` in the current tablet's `Generation` (see [TLock](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/blob/207ac81618e05ade724a8a8193bc9125d466bd06/ydb/core/protos/data_events.proto#L8) message), and a row with these numbers is added to the virtual `/sys/locks` table (which is no longer used). These locks are then returned in result messages (e.g. see [TEvReadResult](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/blob/b07264456a2e8b5929901f258ad60399bb64678a/ydb/core/protos/tx_datashard.proto#L1702)). As long as the lock exists and is not broken, `Generation` and `Counter` fields will stay unchanged. Changes to either `Generation` (invalidation due to restart) or `Counter` (either explicit error code, or invalidation and recreation in the same generation) signal that a previously acquired lock has been broken. The first `Generation` and `Counter` for each shard are remembered by KQP, and changes during transaction lifetime are indicative of possible inconsistencies and serializable isolation violations. Read-Write transactions, or transactions that did not use global MVCC snapshots for efficiency reasons, perform the final commit that validates `Generation`/`Counter` values and commit only succeeds when all of them match.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the lock is added for the first time, it is assigned a monotonically increasing `Counter` in the current tablet's `Generation` (see [TLock](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/blob/207ac81618e05ade724a8a8193bc9125d466bd06/ydb/core/protos/data_events.proto#L8) message), and a row with these numbers is added to the virtual `/sys/locks` table (which is no longer used). These locks are then returned in result messages (e.g. see [TEvReadResult](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/blob/b07264456a2e8b5929901f258ad60399bb64678a/ydb/core/protos/tx_datashard.proto#L1702)). 

In the successful scenario, the lock exists and is not broken, `Generation` and `Counter` fields do not change. 

In the unsuccessful scenarios, previously acquired locks are broken. For example, when changing the `Generation` of the lock (disabling the lock on restart) or the `Counter` (on an explicit error status, or when disabling and recreating the lock in the same generation).

The first `Generation` and `Counter` for each shard are remembered by KQP, and changes during transaction lifetime are indicative of possible inconsistencies and serializable isolation violations. Read-Write transactions, or transactions that did not use global MVCC snapshots for efficiency reasons, perform the final commit that validates `Generation`/`Counter` values and commit only succeeds when all of them match.
```

> Reads using global MVCC snapshots are already consistent, yet acquire locks in case transaction theoretically performs a write later in the lifecycle. When acquiring locks DataShard performs additional checks, on whether or not conflicting changes have been committed "above" the snapshot. When the conflict is detected, the read succeeds, however the lock will have `Counter` equal to [ErrorAlreadyBroken](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/blob/b07264456a2e8b5929901f258ad60399bb64678a/ydb/core/tx/datashard/sys_tables.h#L107), to signal that even though the read is consistent, writes will never succeed. Such transactions may stop trying to add new locks, and succeed when it turns out the full YQL transaction is readonly. When such transactions try to write, however, they are aborted early (it would be impossible to commit them anyway).

Author: Напиши то что ты хочешь видеть через suggest change?
